https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/classdecl.html
Declaring Classes
You've seen classes defined in the following way:
CODE:
class MyClass {
    // field, constructor, and 
    // method declarations
}
This is a class declaration. The class body (the area between the braces) contains all the code that provides for the life cycle of the objects created from the class: constructors for initializing new objects, declarations for the fields that provide the state of the class and its objects, and methods to implement the behavior of the class and its objects.
The preceding class declaration is a minimal one. It contains only those components of a class declaration that are required. You can provide more information about the class, such as the name of its superclass, whether it implements any interfaces, and so on, at the start of the class declaration. For example,
CODE:
class MyClass extends MySuperClass implements YourInterface {
    // field, constructor, and
    // method declarations
}
means that MyClass is a subclass of MySuperClass and that it implements the YourInterface interface.
You can also add modifiers like public or private at the very beginning?so you can see that the opening line of a class declaration can become quite complicated. The modifiers public and private, which determine what other classes can access MyClass, are discussed later in this lesson. The lesson on interfaces and inheritance will explain how and why you would use the extends and implements keywords in a class declaration. For the moment you do not need to worry about these extra complications.
In general, class declarations can include these components, in order:
Your use of this page and all the material on pages under "The Java Tutorials" banner is subject to these legal notices.
Copyright © 1995, 2015 Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Problems with the examples? Try Compiling and Running the Examples: FAQs.
Complaints? Compliments? Suggestions? Give us your feedback.
